Dear Mr B,

Hi.

I'm writing you this letter because I just got back to Sydney from Queensland. I only just got in touch with you to try to meet up this afternoon, and I never replied to your polite decline. I'm sure you really were at school until 6pm. I went past you around four and thought about texting then but didn't end up pressing send.

The clock says 11.10pm for me now and it'd be rude to text past your midnight. I heard you have a baby now.

I spent time this weekend with Madi, Megan, Kara, Tegan - all former Emmanuel students who left almost ten years ago. You taught three of us. We all talked about our impressions now of our time at school and how people had grown up.

I'm 25 now, turning 26 in a month. I remember you were born in 1979 because that Smashing Pumpkins song had particular significance to you. You would have been 27 when I finished high school, maybe 23 when you first started teaching there. You must be 35 or 36 now. I'm friends with people your age now, and people who remind me of you in a lot of ways, but I can't imagine a social situation with them that would be accepting of someone who bought so wholesale into such a fundamentally bigoted institution as Emmanuel College.

I remember our first classes where you tried to explain capitalism with top hats on the whiteboard. I liked you because you were strange and uncertain and you listened wide-eyed and spoke animatedly. It felt like you were all there to be accessed, sincere and vulnerable, and you really wanted to make this shitty and incomprehensible world a little better and more understandable for some people.

In a lot of ways you were the only positive thing about my experience at Emmanuel, although you had your problematic moments too. I distinctly remember in one of those English detentions you used to run I detailed to you the problems I had with motivation and concentration to start and complete homework, symptoms of what has now been diagnosed as ADHD and could have been effectively treated if it'd been recognised as such back then, and your reply was: 'have you ever considered that you're just lazy?'

It was good to talk over the weekend to other people who'd been at Emmanuel and sift through which issues stemmed from my own neuroses, which we'd all gone through, and what other issues people had with the place. I'm sure some people didn't hate it. I didn't talk to those people, except I suppose briefly to Michael and Andrew to get your phone number.

I've always regarded my years at Emmanuel negatively. There was a combination of the general pain of adolescence, the difficulty of being different - fat, nerdy, queer - in Emmanuel's and the Gold Coast's aggressively homogenous culture, mental health issues that may have popped up regardless of where I'd been, general ethical concerns about Christian schools, and specific issues about Emmanuel.

I don't think I ever spoke to you about sexuality in anything more than a theoretical context. I don't know if you would have been able to speak about sexuality in anything more than a Christian context. Emmanuel was an unsafe place to be gender non-conforming in any way. It was an unsafe place to be sexual in any way, let alone in a queer way.

Teenagers police gender presentation wherever you go, but Emmanuel explicitly and aggressively reinforced it. It's hard to separate out from the influence of Gold Coast, or Australia in general, but nowhere else have I heard adult men so explicitly telling teenage girls that it was their responsibility to be attractive and punishing them for it in the same breath. The worse stories aren't mine to tell.

STAFF LIFESTYLE REQUIREMENTS

(The following Lifestyle Clause is an extract of the Emmanuel College Collective Workplace Agreement as agreed to by the Queensland Independent Education Union)
Emmanuel College bases its doctrines and tenets on the Bible, both Old and New Testaments, which the School regards as the inspired and inerrant Word of God.    These doctrines and tenets are expounded in many of Emmanuel College’s public and internal documents, both printed and on the school’s website, and viewable by staff as part of their appointment process. These documents inform our understanding of the lifestyle values which staff who work in this school are required (subject to the provisions of relevant State and Commonwealth discrimination laws) to respect and maintain at all times, and should be understood as source documents, defining our doctrines, tenets, beliefs or teachings.
All staff of Emmanuel College, regardless of their role, are required to be seen to conduct themselves in the course of, or in connection with their work, in a manner consistent with these principles and beliefs and in accordance with the Christian ethics of the School, as contained and interpreted in these documents, thus providing a specifically Christian role model and example to all the families associated with the School.
It is a genuine occupational requirement (subject to the provisions of relevant State and Commonwealth discrimination laws) of Emmanuel College that, consistent with laws, staff members must not act in a way that they know, or ought reasonably to know, is contrary to the religious beliefs of Emmanuel College. Nothing in their deliberate conduct should be incompatible with the intrinsic character of their position, especially, but not only, in relation to the expression of human sexuality through heterosexual, monogamous relationships, expressed intimately through marriage.
Staff are required to regularly and frequently attend a Christian church and to regularly and frequently support Staff Devotions and Staff Worship Services.
Where any staff member acts contrary to these lifestyle requirements, the Principal may attempt restoration, counsel, discipline and dismiss the employee.
I hereby affirm my understanding of, and acceptance of the above requirements. I understand that continuing employment at Emmanuel College implies my ongoing adherence to these principles.

Fuck everyone involved in writing that. Fuck everyone who agreed with it. Fuck everyone who never questioned it. Fuck everyone who lobbied for, wrote, and legislated the exceptions in the Fair Work Act 2009 that makes that regressive shit legal. Fuck you, Mr B, for condoning that for ten years. You're either a bigot or a coward. I think the latter is more likely, but I couldn't tell without asking.

I wanted to talk to you. You are deeply principled and intelligent and I have great respect for you. I always liked talking to you, about psychoanalysis or Marxism or books or whatever else, and I wondered if you'd still be wide-eyed and animated and thoughtful. You shaped me in a lot of ways. I wanted to see if Breccan really looks like you.

I was wandering around South Brisbane anyway. I lived there in 2009, a year I'd mostly forgotten. The second house I lived in there was 33 Stephens Road, near Southbank train station, and incidentally close to where you apparently work now. I walked to Stephens Road at 3.30pm to see my old house, which I half expected to have been knocked down by now. I assumed you were near by.

I walked from the train station by the galleries I used to wander around alone, to the ghost of the cafe I used to work at, past the church where a balding man with a maths doctorate used to make chai for swaying and wrinkled women, the hardware store where I bought a glass cutter for some brilliant idea I never executed, the street I'd seen SPB (a beautiful pizza chef at my ghost cafe), the park where I walked with TLB through mist to the stairs and read bukowski, a fridge like the one we'd photographed the mannequin arm inside, Cyrillic letters on a white washed chapel where I'd seen a wedding party, walking past girls in bright green dresses and boys in yellow, to the short brick wall where I smoked with BRS while he complained pointedly about being lonely across the road from where I'd lived.

The yellow paint on my old house was still peeling, the windows still barred, the tame flowers still growing wildly, all doors open to let air circulate. I tried not to stare as a woman walked down the corridor to take out the rubbish. I thought about the time I spent there, lying in bed terrified of moths, listening to TLB's paranoia, eating nothing but poppadoms, sleeping all the time, trying to stay dreaming, trying to write F R E E D O M on the walls with cut out book pages. (I got to F R.)

So I lay on the wall opposite, casually looking out for you and practising how surprised I'd pretend to be if you did go past, studying the leaves between me and the sky. The veins split oddly in five, a circle from the centre.

I don't know if I'd have recognised you if you walked past.

I walked closer to (probably) you, past the tracks I'd wanted to jump on to, away from the roads I remembered, past more boys in uniform, towards the school you apparently teach at now.

"It'll be over soon," a mother warned one she was walking with, "and you'll miss being with them all the time."

A sign told me: "Celebrate the past. Live in the present." I don't know what it told me to do about the future. Become it? Embrace it?

As I walked back down past the tracks I'd fantasised of dying on, past the house where I excused my cowardice by smoking and starving my way towards death, I was furious about the sign. Celebrate the past? Should I celebrate the weight I lost then without criticising the context of what allowed it? 
Or - probably more relevantly - should we uncritically celebrate the white history of colonial nations without criticising the context of the displacement, rape and murder that allowed it? Of course we fucking shouldn't. What was this wealthy Catholic boys school teaching?

Isn't Catholicism meant to be based on acknowledging and atoning for sins from the past? Or does believing forgiveness has been obtained make them even more callous about the ongoing effects?

You are the head of English here now, though, and I guess I trust your judgement to teach critically. It's easy in Australia to avoid thinking about or discussing the brutality of colonialism and the unacknowledged and unresolved nature of our crimes against the first inhabitants of this land, but you did teach that when you taught me.

That was ten years ago, though. You were only a few years out of university then, fresh from being waved Green Left Weekly as you walked to class. You've been entrenched in this system for ten years now - and you went through a similar school yourself. Have you spent any amount of time outside of institutions designed to increase the advantage of the privileged? Have you retained your integrity, your intellectual honesty, your sense of justice? Did you ever have those things?

Fond regards,

Merrin
